# NOTE

This readme is outdated, and refers primarily to the bundled version of our work which preceded the current, unbundled approach.

# Experiments with Universal Algebra in Lean

This repository contains some constructions arising from universal algebra, formalized in the lean proof assistant.

We define the following structures:
1. A *language* defined as a structure in the following way:
  ```lean
  structure lang := (op : ℕ → Type*)
  ```
  Here `op n` should be thought of as the type of `n`-ary operations.
  We introduce a `has_coe_to_fun` for languages, so that we can just write `L n` for the type of `n`-ary operations associated to a language `L`.
 
2. Given any language `L`, we defined a typeclass of interpretations for `L`. That is, given an `n`-ary operation of type `L n`, a type `A`, and an `n`-tuple of terms of `A`, we can "apply" `L` to produce another term of type `A`. 
  The approach is as follows.
  ```lean
  class has_app (L : lang) (A : Type*) :=
    (app {n} : L n → ftuple A n → A)
  ```
3. Given a language `L`, we defined *terms* of `L` by an inductive procedure as follows:
  ```lean
  inductive term (L : lang.{v}) : ℕ → Type v 
  | of {n} : L n → term n
  | get : term 1
  | proj {m n} : (fin n → fin m) → term n → term m
  | compl {m n} : term m → term (1 + n) → term (m + n)
  | compr {m n} : term m → term (n + 1) → term (n + m)
  ```
  A term of type `L.term m n` should be thought of as an operations which sends `m`-tuples to `n`-tuples.
  Any type with an interpretation of `L` obtains an interpretation for any such term by applying structural induction.

4. Given a language `L`, we defined the type of *rules* on `L`, which are relations on the terms of `L`.
5. Given a language `L` and rules `R`, an *algebra* for the pair `(L,R)` is a raw algebra which satisfies the axioms outlined by the rules.
  Our construction for this, denoted `ualg` extends `has_app` as follows
  ```lean
  class ualg {L : lang} (R : rules L) (A : Type*) extends has_app L A :=
    (cond_eq {n} (t1 t2 : L.gen n) (as : ftuple A n) : R t1 t2 → applyt t1 as = applyt t2 as)
  ```
  Here `L.gen` is the (dependent) type of terms generated by the given language `L`, and `applyt` is the interpretation of such terms in the given raw algebra. 

# Morphisms of languages/rules

Given two languages `L1` and `L2`, a morphism `L1 -> L2` is simply the data of a function `L1 n -> L2 n` for every natural `n`.
This is extended to morphisms of pairs `(L1,R1) -> (L2,R2)` where `Ri : rules Li` in the obvious way as follows:
```lean
structure rules_hom {L1 : lang} (R1 : rules L1) {L2 : lang} (R2 : rules L2) := 
(lhom : lang_hom L1 L2)
(cond_imp {n} {t1 t2 : L1.gen n} : R1 t1 t2 → R2 (lhom.gen t1) (lhom.gen t2))
```
We use the notation `→#` to denote morphisms of languages.
In the code above, for a morphism `f` from `L1` to `L2`, the function `t.mapt f` maps a term in `L1` to a term in `L2`.
We also introduce the notation `→$` to denote morphisms of pairs consisting of a language and associated rules.
If `Ri`, ` i = 1,2` are rules on languages `Li`, then we can simply write `R1 →$ R2` for the type of morphisms of pairs `(L1,R1) -> (L2,R2)`.

# Left adjoints

Given a morphism of pairs `(L1,R1) -> (L2,R2)` as above, there is an obvious forgetful functor from `(L2,R2)`-algebras to `(L1,R1)`-algebras.
The most substantial portion of this work is in the construction of the *left adjoint* to this forgetful functor. 
This left adjoint is construted by combining three steps, and the resulting construction can be found in the file `src/fron_ualg.lean`.
It is perhaps important to mention that all of the usual "free" constructions in algebra are special cases of this.
